Title: Reinforced Generation of Combinatorial Structures: Ramsey Numbers

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.09172v1

Published Time: Wed, 11 Mar 2026 00:31:18 GMT

Number of Pages: 20

Markdown Content:
# Reinforced Generation of Combinatorial Structures: Ramsey Numbers 

# Working Paper Ansh Nagda * Prabhakar Raghavan † Abhradeep Thakurta ‡

Abstract 

We present improved lower bounds for five classical Ramsey numbers: R(3, 13 ) is increased from 60 to 61, R(3, 18 ) from 99 to 100, R(4, 13 ) from 138 to 139, R(4, 14 ) from 147 to 148, and R(4, 15 ) from 158 to 159. These results were achieved using AlphaEvolve , an LLM-based code mutation agent. Beyond these new results, we successfully recovered lower bounds for all Ramsey numbers known to be exact, and matched the best known lower bounds across many other cases. These include bounds for which previous work does not detail the algorithms used. Virtually all known Ramsey lower bounds are derived computationally, with bespoke search algo-rithms each delivering a handful of results. AlphaEvolve is a single meta-algorithm yielding search algo-rithms for all of our results. 

> *

University of California, Berkeley, and Google DeepMind. 

> †

Google. 

> ‡

Google DeepMind. 

> arXiv:2603.09172v1 [math.CO] 10 Mar 2026

# 1 Introduction 

Ramsey numbers have been extensively studied in the literature [Rad24]. In this work we focus on the classical graph formulation of Ramsey numbers, where R(r, s) is the smallest number n such that every undirected graph G on n vertices has either has a clique of size r, or an independent set of size s. While tight bounds on R(r, s) are known for small values of r and s (namely, for (3, s) with 3 ≤ s ≤ 9 and (4, s)

with s ∈ { 4, 5 } [Rad24]), there is a large gap for many other values of r and s. In this work, we focus on improving lower bounds on R(r, s). If we can exhibit a graph with n vertices that has no cliques of size r,nor any independent set of size s, we establish that R(r, s) ≥ n + 1. Except for very small r, s where analytical methods have worked, prior work has used a variety of search algorithms to computationally derive lower bounds on R(r, s) (by generating graphs without the appropri-ate cliques and independent sets); some of these algorithms yielded the best known results for many pairs 

r, s [Rad24]. We invoke AlphaEvolve [RPBN +24, NVE +25], a code-mutation agent that uses LLMs (Large-Language-Models) to iteratively evolve code-snippets to generate better lower bounds. For each r, s, we use AlphaEvolve to generate search algorithms that produce larger and larger graphs without violating the clique and independence set constraints. (The exact experimental setup is a bit more elaborate.) Thus we use AlphaEvolve as a single meta-algorithm to generate search procedures for meeting or beating Ram-sey lower bounds for many values of r and s. Our work is similar in spirit to the discovery of extremal combinatorial objects in [NRT25, GGSTW25]. 

# 1.1 Summary of Our Results 

In this paper, we focus on small Ramsey numbers [Rad24] where r, s ≤ 22. Our main results are that we improve R(3, 13 ) from 60 [Kol15] to 61, R(3, 18 ) from 99 [Exo06] to 100, R(4, 13 ) from 138 [ET15] to 139, 

R(4, 14 ) from 147 [ET15] to 148, and R(4, 15 ) from 158 [Tat20] to 159. Furthermore, we match the SoTA on many other cells in Table 1, including all cells for which the exact value of R(r, s) is known. The search algorithms used to match or improve these 28 bounds can be categorized into four distinct families of initialization; these are summarized in Table 2 and detailed in the Appendix. Note that for some of these cells, prior work only exhibits the graph implying the bound, without giving the search algorithm that discovered the graph [Rad24]. 

Note: Our constructions for the the cells R(3, 13 ), R(3, 18 ), R(4, 13 ), R(4, 14 ) and R(4, 15 ) are made public on Github at this link. 

r \s 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 3 6 9 14 18 23 28 36 40 47 61 82 92 100 106 111 122 132 

4 18 25 36 49 92 128 139 148 159 

5 80 101 133 

6 115 Table 1: Ramsey Number R(r, s) lower bounds achieved by AlphaEvolve. Highlights indicate performance status: light blue for optimal lower bounds (matching upper bounds); yellow for matching current best-known lower bounds (where the upper bound remains strictly higher); and green for new results that surpass the prior best lower bound. Algorithms are hyperlinked. 2 AlphaEvolve Meta-search, and Discovered Search Algorithms 

AlphaEvolve [NVE +25, RPBN +24] maintains a family of search algorithms (that search for graphs that establish Ramsey lower bounds), using an LLM to evolve them to find better search algorithms. Typically this process uses a synthetic objective function to guide AlphaEvolve, as a proxy for the true objective (the size of the graph being discovered). This detail will become evident in our presentation of Algorithm 1 below. 

AlphaEvolve experimental setup: Algorithm 1 details the way this evolution develops search algorithms that try to improve the current SoTA for R(r, s) (denoted as nSoTA in Algorithm 1). Here are the core ideas: • Evolution: Maintain a population P of search algorithms. Use a performance-based Select function to choose a parent algorithm from P, then prompt an LLM to generate a mutated version pnew .• Execution: Execute pnew to get two graphs: a primary graph G1 and a larger ”prospect” graph G2.• Scoring: If G1 is valid, it receives a score based on its size, heavily boosted if it is beyond nSoTA . G2

contributes an additive bonus inversely proportional to its violation count, guiding the search to push boundary limits. Formally, Eviol represents the expected total number of r-cliques and s-independent sets in a random graph of size v2 (with edge probability 0.5). The score S is updated with a term that increases linearly as the number of violations in G2 decreases relative to the expected baseline Eviol .A central feature of Algorithm 1 is that it initializes with an empty baseline graph ( pbase ). AlphaEvolve then generates search programs pnew aimed at discovering larger graphs. This approach encourages broad exploration, allowing the evolutionary process to learn how to modify and extend smaller, valid lower-bound constructions into larger ones. This is in contrast to an approach where we are specifically searching for graph constructions of a particular size [Exo06, ET15, Exo23]. 

Algorithm 1: AlphaEvolve: Ramsey Program Search 

Input: Ramsey parameters (r, s, nSoTA ), where r represents the clique size, and s represents the independent set size, and nSoTA is the current best graph size for R(r, s) from [Rad24] 

Output: Program p∗ with best graph  

> 1

Init: Population P ← { pbase } // p base returns empty graph  

> 2

while compute budget remaining do  

> 3

pnew ← LLM Mutation (Select (P ))  

> 4

(G1, G2) ← pnew .run ()  

> 5

if G1 has no r-cliques or s-independent sets then  

> 6

v1, v2 ← | V(G1)|, |V(G2)| 

> 7

S ←



4 · v1 if v1 > nSoTA 

2 · v1 if v1 = nSoTA 

v1 otherwise 

// Bonus: Reward low-violation "prospect" graphs  

> 8

if v2 > v1 then  

> 9

Eviol ← (v2  

> r)
> 2(r
> 2)

+ (v2  

> s)
> 2(s
> 2)
> 10

S ← S + 12 max 



0, 1 − count viol (G2)

> Eviol



where count viol returns the number of 

r-cliques and s-independent sets in the graph  

> 11

else  

> 12

S ← − 1 

> 13

score (pnew ) ← S 

> 14

P ← P ∪ { (pnew , S)} 

> 15

return arg max  

> p∈P

score (p)

2Algorithms 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 detail the five search algorithms that AlphaEvolve found for the cells R(3, 13 ),

R(3, 18 ), R(4, 13 ), R(4, 14 ), and R(4, 15 ) respectively. The detailed algorithms for all other colored cells in Table 1 are presented in Algorithms 7–29. Note that each of the search algorithms seems specific to the corresponding cells; their success does not seem to transfer between cells, even when run for a reasonably long time. In Table 2, we summarize the initialization strategies used in the search algorithms. We left out algorithms for R(3, 3 ) and R(3, 4 ) because AlphaEvolve just quoted the corresponding adjacency matrices from the LLM’s memory. The search algorithms for each of the cells (while having some differences) are different variants of stochastic search. If we take a closer look at the search algorithms discovered by AlphaEvolve for the colored cells in Ta-ble 1, a pattern starts emerging: a) For some of the cells, a standard (stochastic) search from a generic starting point of Erd˝ os-R´ enyi graphs suffices, b) For some, it was necessary to seed with specific algebraic graphs (e.g., Paley/cyclic), and c) For some the search had to be guided within some structural restrictions (e.g., staying within the family of cyclic graphs). While clique and independent set counting is often a com-putational bottleneck in Ramsey constructions, the graph sizes for the instances in Table 1 were relatively small. Thus, clique counting was not a limiting factor for these results. 

Comment on the use of AI summarization of the AlphaEvolve generated code: We utilized Gemini 3 to summarize the AlphaEvolve-generated code for all cells and to construct the classifications in Table 2. We scrutinized the underlying code to ensure that these AI-generated summaries reflect the search algorithms. In Table 2 we see a bucketing of the various algorithms by Gemini, with the split being on the method by which each algorithm initialized its graph search.                      

> Random & Stochastic Initialization Paley & Algebraic Seeding Circulant & Cyclic Bootstrap Hybrid, Fractal & Spectral Seeding R(3,5) ,R(3,6) ,R(3,7) ,
> R(3,8) ,R(4,5) R(3,6) ,R(3,10) ,R(3,20) ,
> R(4,4) ,R(4,12) ,R(4,13) ,
> R(4,15) ,R(6,7) R(3,9) ,R(3,13) ,R(3,16) ,
> R(3,17) ,R(3,18) ,R(3,19) ,
> R(3,21) ,R(3,22) ,R(4,6) ,
> R(4,7) ,R(4,10) ,R(4,14) ,
> R(5,7) ,R(5,8) ,R(5,9) R(3,6) ,R(3,11)
> •Initialization: Random graphs ( G

(n, p)) or empty/greedy baseline.      

> •Initialization: Explicit seeding with Paley graphs, cubic, and quadratic residue graphs.
> •Initialization:
> Bootstrapped from circulant graphs, sum-free sets, or cyclic constructions.
> •Initialization: Complex mixtures: Fractal/self-similar construction, spectral properties, or hybrid pools.

Table 2: Taxonomy of Ramsey Search Algorithms by Initialization Method 

# 3 Comparison to Prior Work 

We compare our results against prior work that established the previous state-of-the-art (SoTA) for the entries in Table 1. Our primary reference for these baselines is [Rad24]. Since many historical results rely on personal communications without published algorithmic details, we restrict our comparison to cases where: a) a public reference is available, and b) a computational approach was employed to achieve the lower bound. • R(4, 13 ), R(4, 14 ), R(4, 15 ), and R(6, 7 ): Except for R(4, 15 ), the previous SoTA for these cells were established in [ET15]. For R(4, 15 ), the prior SoTA was established in [Tat20]. We improved the bound for R(4, 13 ) (and R(4, 14 )), while matching the bound for R(6, 7 ). Notably, the search algo-rithms discovered by AlphaEvolve for R(4, 13 ) and R(6, 7 ) (Algorithms 4 and 29) initialize with the same algebraic structures—cubic residue and Paley graphs, respectively—as those used in [ET15]. For 3R(4, 14 ), Exoo [ET15] initialized the search with a cubic graph, whereas AlphaEvolve (Algorithm 5) used a class of circulant graphs with varying periodicities. The subsequent optimization strategies for all the cells differ significantly: AlphaEvolve utilizes evolved heuristics rather than the standard simulated annealing employed in [ET15]. Our approach for R(4, 15 ) (Algorithm 6) diverges from the Cayley graph initialization of [ET15] (which is the SoTA prior to [Tat20]), starting instead from a Paley graph. We unfortunately could not compare to [Tat20] as it is referred to as personal communication in [Rad24]. • R(4, 6 ): We match the SoTA for this cell, which was achieved by [Exo12]. While [Exo12] initializes the search with a random graph, AlphaEvolve opts for a cyclic graph initialization. Despite this dif-ference, the subsequent search procedure discovered by AlphaEvolve (Algorithm 22) bears structural similarities to the heuristic search described in [Exo12]. • R(4, 10 ): The current SoTA for this cell is attributed to [HK03], who employed a branch-and-bound search on circulant colorings. In contrast, the algorithm discovered by AlphaEvolve (Algorithm 24) initiates by sampling from a distribution over circulant graphs, followed by a custom local search that integrates sophisticated tabu search mechanisms with sequential growth. This comparison demonstrates that for many cells — even those where AlphaEvolve only matched the SoTA — AlphaEvolve’s search algorithms differ materially from prior methods, despite often shar-ing initialization families (e.g., algebraic or cyclic graphs). At a meta-level, the algorithms generated by AlphaEvolve exhibit three salient properties: a) they exploit known algebraic structures relevant to the spe-cific cell; b) unlike many human-designed algorithms, they typically chain multiple heuristics or execute them in parallel; and c) they incorporate custom heuristics for approximate clique and independent set counting to accelerate candidate evaluation. Furthermore, for cases such as R(4, 10 ) (see Algorithm 24), AlphaEvolve’s search strategies appear novel and, to the best of our knowledge, are absent from existing literature. 

Prior work on AI and extremal combinatorics: Recent work has studied the use of AI in extremal combina-torics: finding counterexamples to graph theory conjectures [Wag21], the capset problem [RPBN +24], con-structing maximum grid subsets avoiding isosceles triangles [CEWW24], discovering extremal Ramanujan graphs [NRT25], and improving bounds for the finite field Kakeya problem [GGSTW25]. Apart from [Wag21], all the the other results (including ours) have used some variant of AlphaEvolve to discover algorithms that eventually search for extremal combinatorial structures. This contrasts with some other advancements in the space of AI and math/theoretical computer science [Bub25, WCAJ +26] where new theorems were dis-covered by directly prompting LLMs (large-language-models). It is unclear at this point whether directly prompting an LLM will result in discovering extremal combinatorial structures. 

# 4 Conclusion 

LLM-based systems like AlphaEvolve have been applied to a variety of problems in mathematics and com-puter science (see [NRT25] for a detailed survey). Our work lies within the domain of extremal combinatorics 

and is most closely related to [NRT25], which generated gadgets and extremal graphs to establish new hard-ness of approximation results. However, while [NRT25] required significant human effort to design proof structures amenable to AlphaEvolve, here the human effort is in crafting the overarching Algorithm 1. Un-like prior computational attempts at improving Ramsey lower bounds [Rad24] — which typically rely on executing bespoke, human-designed heuristics — AlphaEvolve automates the heuristic discovery process: it searches for novel search algorithms .In this work, we focus on Ramsey lower bounds, where the objective is to generate a witness graph of a target size that avoids specific cliques and independent sets. The complementary challenge of improving Ramsey upper bounds requires a fundamentally different approach: demonstrating the non-existence of any such graph larger than a specific threshold. Unlike lower bound searches, this cannot be solved by constructing a single example. Recently, formal methods have been successfully employed to prove that 

R(4, 5 ) = 25 [GB24]. 4References 

[Bub25] Sebastien Bubeck. Claim: GPT-5-pro can prove new interesting mathematics. Post on X (for-merly Twitter), 8 2025. The post claims GPT-5 Pro was used to improve a mathematical bound in a convex optimization paper. The original URL is not available in the screenshot. [CEWW24] Franc ¸ois Charton, Jordan S Ellenberg, Adam Zsolt Wagner, and Geordie Williamson. Pattern-boost: Constructions in mathematics with a little help from ai. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.00566 ,2024. [ET15] Geoffrey Exoo and Milos Tatarevic. New lower bounds for 28 classical Ramsey numbers. arXiv preprint arXiv:1504.02403 , 2015. [Exo06] Geoffrey Exoo. Ramsey number constructions. Personal communication and online database, 2006. Available at http://cs.indstate.edu/ge/RAMSEY .[Exo12] Geoffrey Exoo. On the Ramsey number R(4, 6). The Electronic Journal of Combinatorics ,19(1):P66, 2012. [Exo23] Geoffrey Exoo. A lower bound for R (5, 6). arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17099 , 2023. [GB24] Thibault Gauthier and Chad E Brown. A formal proof of R (4, 5)= 25. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01761 , 2024. [GGSTW25] Bogdan Georgiev, Javier G ´ omez-Serrano, Terence Tao, and Adam Zsolt Wagner. Mathematical exploration and discovery at scale. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.02864 , 2025. [HK03] Heiko Harborth and S. Krause. Ramsey numbers for circulant colorings. Congressus Numeran-tium , 161:139–150, 2003. [Kol15] M. Kolodyazhny. Novye nizhnie granitsy chisel Ramsey R(3, 12 ) i R(3, 13 ). Matematicheskoye i Informacionnoe Modelirovanie, Tyumen , 14:126–130, 2015. (In Russian). [NRT25] Ansh Nagda, Prabhakar Raghavan, and Abhradeep Thakurta. Reinforced generation of com-binatorial structures: Hardness of approximation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.18057 , 2025. [NVE +25] Alexander Novikov, Ngˆ an V ˜ u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Kozlovskii, Francisco JR Ruiz, Abbas Mehra-bian, et al. Alphaevolve: A coding agent for scientific and algorithmic discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131 , 2025. [Rad24] Stanisław Radziszowski. Small ramsey numbers. The electronic journal of combinatorics , pages DS1–Sept, 2024. The latest draft https://www.cs.rit.edu/˜spr/ElJC/ejcram18.pdf 

will be updated soon. [RPBN +24] Bernardino Romera-Paredes, Mohammadamin Barekatain, Alexander Novikov, Matej Balog, M Pawan Kumar, Emilien Dupont, Francisco JR Ruiz, Jordan S Ellenberg, Pengming Wang, Omar Fawzi, et al. Mathematical discoveries from program search with large language mod-els. Nature , 625(7995):468–475, 2024. [Tat20] M. Tatarevic. Personal communication, graph constructions for lower bounds on ramsey numbers. http://github.com/milostatarevic/ramsey-numbers/tree/master/ graphs , 2020. [Wag21] Adam Zsolt Wagner. Constructions in combinatorics via neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.14516 , 2021. 5[WCAJ +26] David P Woodruff, Vincent Cohen-Addad, Lalit Jain, Jieming Mao, Song Zuo, Mohammad-Hossein Bateni, Simina Branzei, Michael P Brenner, Lin Chen, Ying Feng, et al. Acceler-ating scientific research with gemini: Case studies and common techniques. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.03837 , 2026. 

Algorithm 2: Search algorithm for R (3, 13 ) lower bound 

• Phase 1: Cyclic Bootstrap: The search begins by rapidly identifying a large base graph Gstart 

using a randomized cyclic construction. Edges are defined by a difference set S, where (u, v) ∈

E ⇐⇒ | u − v| (mod n) ∈ S. The algorithm maximizes n such that the graph remains (3, 13 )-free. • Phase 2: Iterative Expansion: Starting from Gcurr ← Gstart , the algorithm incrementally increases the graph size to n + 1. A new vertex vnew is added, and its connections are optimized to maintain the (3, 13 )-free property using advanced heuristics. • Initialization (Hitting Sets): The neighborhood of vnew is explicitly constructed to ”hit” (in-tersect) existing independent sets of size s − 1 (12-anticliques). By ensuring vnew connects to at least one vertex in every such set, the algorithm prevents them from growing to size s = 13: 

N(vnew ) ← { u ∈ V | u intersects C ∈ C 12 (Gcurr )}

• Candidate Selection: Before full optimization, multiple initialization strategies (Hitting Sets, Max Independent Set, Random) generate candidate neighborhoods. Each candidate under-goes a short “Mini-SA” burst—a truncated annealing run with an accelerated cooling sched-ule—to empirically evaluate its quality and discard unpromising seeds before the expensive main optimization begins. The candidate with the lowest energy is selected for the main re-finement phase. • Adaptive Simulated Annealing (SA): The selected graph is refined to minimize a weighted energy function: 

E(G) = λK3 · count (K3) + λI13 · count (I13 )

The weights λ are adaptive : if count (K3) dominates, λK3 increases dynamically to force the solver to prioritize destroying triangles. 6Algorithm 3: Search algorithm for R (3, 18 ) lower bound 

• Main Loop (Iterative Deepening): Initialize target size n ← max (60, |V(Gbest )| + 1). The algorithm iterates through increasing n, attempting to construct a valid (3, 18 )-free graph using three strategies. • Strategy 1: Cyclic Construction: Generates a maximal sum-free set S ⊂ { 1, . . . , ⌊n/2 ⌋} . The graph is constructed such that (u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ |u − v| (mod n) ∈ S. This guarantees K3-freeness ( r-free). • Strategy 2: Block Construction: Decomposes n into nb blocks of size k. Uses two sum-free sets: Sintra for edges within blocks and Sinter for edges between blocks Bi and Bj.

Eblock = E(Sintra ) ∪ E(Sinter )

• Strategy 3: Adaptive Growth: Initializes with the best valid graph found so far. Adds a new vertex vnew and connects it to existing vertices u ∈ V greedily, provided no triangle is formed: 

N(vnew ) ← { u | ∄w ∈ N(vnew ) s.t. (u, w) ∈ E}

• Filtration & Validation: Candidates are first filtered by a heuristic estimate α(G). If the heuristic fails to find an independent set of size s, an exact solver computes α(G). If α(G) < s,update Gbest ← G and increment n.

Algorithm 4: Search algorithm for R(4, 13 )

• Algebraic Bootstrap ( C3127 ): The search is initialized with a highly specific algebraic construc-tion: the Cayley graph formed by cubic residues in the finite field F127 .

V = Z127 , (u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ (u − v) (mod 127 ) ∈ { x3 | x ∈ Z∗

> 127

}

This provides a starting graph of size 127 that is likely very close to valid. • Incremental Violation Tracking: Unlike previous approaches that only count defects, this algorithm maintains explicit sets of all current 4-cliques and 13-anticliques (e.g., ‘Set[FrozenSet[int]]‘). This allows for precise, incremental updates of the defect lists upon every edge flip without full graph re-scanning. • Two-Stage Move Evaluation: To handle the large neighborhood of potential moves, the algo-rithm uses a filter: 1. Heuristic Filter: Scores candidates using a fast proxy (counting common neighbors for 

∆K4 and common non-neighbors for ∆I13 risk). 2. Exact Delta: Performs the expensive subgraph isomorphism check only on the top sur-vivors of the heuristic filter. • Perturbation-Based Extension: When extending the graph ( n → n + 1), the new vertex vector is generated by cloning and perturbing an existing row (flipping ≈ 5-15% of edges). This assumes the optimal connection pattern for a new node is likely similar to valid patterns al-ready present in the graph. The score for a candidate extended graph is computed quickly by making use of prior knowledge of the violations in the base graph. • Strategic Kick (Escape): If the Tabu search stagnates (no improvement for 500 iterations), a ”Strategic Kick” is applied: the algorithm forces a short sequence of random edge flips (ignor-ing objective value) to jump out of the local basin of attraction. 

7Algorithm 5: Search algorithm for R (4, 14 ) lower bound 

• Orbit-Based Circulant Construction: The search is restricted to highly symmetric, vertex-transitive circulant graphs. Instead of searching the full graph space, the algorithm generates a difference set S ⊂ Zn that fully defines the graph: (u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ (u − v) ( mod n) ∈ S.The set S is constructed as a union of orbits under modular multiplication by a generator g,including additive inverses to ensure the graph is undirected. • Vertex-Transitive Reduction: Because the graph is vertex-transitive, global structural con-straints are reduced to localized checks around a single vertex (vertex 0). Here, S acts exactly as the neighborhood of vertex 0: 

K4 freeness ⇐⇒ No K3 in the subgraph induced by the neighborhood SI14 freeness ⇐⇒ No I13 in the subgraph induced by the non-neighborhood Zn \ (S ∪ 0)

• Stochastic Orbit Sampling: When the number of generated orbits m is small ( m ≤ 14), the algorithm exhaustively evaluates all 2 m combinations to form the connection set S. For larger orbit spaces, it stochastically samples unions of orbits that yield a target neighborhood degree (restricting the size of S to be between 24 and 48), rapidly skipping configurations outside this viable density window. • High-Performance Bitset Filtration: The localized K3 and I13 subgraph isomorphism checks are aggressively accelerated using custom bitwise operations. Adjacency lists for the sub-graphs are compressed into bitmasks, allowing the recursive clique searches to use fast bit-shifts and masking to evaluate thousands of orbit combinations per second. 

Algorithm 6: Search algorithm for R (4, 15 ) lower bound 

• Harmonic Genetic Memory: The algorithm maintains a global “gene pool” across generations that records the frequency of successful edges and “orbits” (cyclic distances). 

Medge [u, v] ← M edge [u, v] + 1 if (u, v) ∈ E(Gvalid )

Morbit [d] ← M orbit [d] + 1 if ∃(u, v) ∈ E(Gvalid ) s.t. |u − v| = d

• Spectral Initialization: New candidates for size n are initialized either via algebraic construc-tions (Generalized Paley/Quadratic Residue graphs on primes p ≈ n) or by extending Gbest 

using probabilities derived from the harmonic memory M.• Tabu-Enhanced Simulated Annealing: The graph undergoes local search to minimize strictly the clique count K4. Moves (edge flips) are managed by a Tabu list to prevent cycling, with an adaptive cooling schedule that slows down when K4 counts approach zero. • Look-Ahead & Harmonic Scoring: When removing an edge to break a K4, candidates are scored not just by ∆K4, but by a “Look-Ahead” penalty (risk of creating large independent sets) and a “Harmony” bonus (preserving edges/orbits with high history in M): Score (e) = ∆K4 − λ1 · Risk (Ineighbor ) − λ2 · M (e)

• Harmonic Tunneling: If the search stagnates with K4 > 0, the algorithm identifies a “toxic orbit” d∗—the cyclic distance most frequent within the remaining cliques. It then performs a massive mutation by flipping all edges (u, v) where |u − v| = d∗, tunneling out of the local minimum. • Constraint Toggle Strategy: The search prioritizes K4 = 0. Once satisfied, it switches to break-ing Independent Sets ( I15 ). It identifies a violating set S via heuristic sampling and adds an edge (u, v) within S that minimizes the creation of new K4s. 

8Algorithm 7: Search algorithm for R(3, 5 ) lower bound 

• Sequential Stochastic Search: The algorithm iterates through increasing graph sizes n, start-ing from n = 10. For each size, it initializes a random graph G ∼ G(n, 0.5 ) and attempts to refine it into a valid (3, 5 )-free graph. • Objective Function: The minimization target is the unweighted sum of forbidden subgraphs. The energy of a state is calculated by a full traversal of the graph: 

E(G) = count (K3) + count (I5)

• Simulated Annealing: The graph evolves via a standard annealing process. A candidate move consists of flipping a single random edge (u, v). Moves are accepted based on the Metropolis criterion with geometric cooling ( Tk+1 = α · Tk). • Termination & Progression: If the energy reaches E(G) = 0, the graph is saved as the new 

Gbest , and the target size is incremented ( n ← n + 1). If the cooling schedule completes with 

E(G) > 0, the sequential search terminates. 

Algorithm 8: Search algorithm for R(3, 6 )

• Hybrid Initialization Strategy: For each target size n, the algorithm selects from three initial-ization methods: 1. Constructive: Extends the previous best graph Gn−1 by adding a vertex with sparse ran-dom connections ( p ≈ 0.45). 2. Algebraic: Constructs a Paley graph if n is a prime power and n ≡ 1 (mod 4 ).3. Stochastic: Generates random graphs G(n, p) with varying densities ( p ∈ { 0.4, 0.5, 0.6 }). • Asymmetric Cost Function: The Simulated Annealing process minimizes a weighted energy function. The penalty for 3-cliques is set 100 × higher than for independent sets, forcing the solver to prioritize the strict K3-free constraint: 

E(G) = 100 · count (K3) + count (I6)

• Sequential Growth: The search operates sequentially from n = 12 to n = 18. The algorithm iterates to size n + 1 only after successfully finding a valid zero-defect graph for size n.• Simulated Annealing Refinement: Refinement is performed via standard SA with geometric cooling ( Tnew = 0.9999 · Tcurr ). The high triangle penalty effectively restricts the search space to “nearly” triangle-free graphs. 

Algorithm 9: Search algorithm for R(3, 7 )

• Iterative Deepening: The search begins at n = 22 (a likely lower bound for efficient search) and increments n only after a valid (3, 7 )-free graph is found. • Incremental Initialization: For the initial size ( n = 22), the graph is generated randomly (p = 0.5). For subsequent sizes ( n > 22), the algorithm initializes by extending the previous best graph Gn−1, adding a new vertex with random connections ( p = 0.5) to preserve existing structure. • Standard Simulated Annealing: The graph is refined to minimize the unweighted defect sum 

E(G) = count (K3) + count (I7). A move consists of flipping a single random edge, accepted via the Metropolis criterion with a geometric cooling schedule ( Tk+1 = αTk). • Cost-Driven Termination: The optimization for a specific n runs for a fixed budget (500,000 steps). If the cost reaches 0, the graph is saved as G1 and the search advances to n + 1. If the cost remains positive, the loop terminates. 

9Algorithm 10: Search algorithm for R(3, 8 )

• Iterative Two-Stage Growth: The algorithm builds the graph vertex-by-vertex ( n → n + 1). For each new size, it first attempts a lightweight Greedy Extension : the new vertex is con-nected randomly ( p = 0.4), followed by local edge flips restricted to the new vertex’s incident edges to resolve immediate conflicts. • Extended Local Search (ELS): If the greedy extension fails to find a valid graph, the algorithm triggers a robust ELS Phase . This involves up to 100 random restarts; in each restart, the algorithm performs global edge flips (modifying any edge in the graph, not just the new ones) to escape local minima and reach zero violations. • Violation Minimization: The objective function is the unweighted sum of forbidden sub-graphs. The search accepts any move (edge flip) that reduces or maintains the violation count, effectively acting as a descent method with plateau traversal: 

E(G) = count (K3) + count (I8)

Algorithm 11: Search algorithm for R(3, 9 )

• Algebraic Bootstrap (Circulant Search): The algorithm begins by exhaustively searching for large valid graphs within the space of Circulant Graphs . It generates sum-free sets S ⊂ Zn to define edges (u, v) where |u − v| (mod n) ∈ S. This algebraic structure guarantees K3-freeness by definition and symmetries often yield high Ramsey numbers. • Triangle-Free Growth Strategy: To increase the graph size n → n + 1, the algorithm uses a structural heuristic: the new vertex vnew is connected exclusively to a Maximal Independent Set I of the current graph. Since no two vertices in I are connected, connecting vnew to all u ∈ I

cannot form a triangle. 

N(vnew ) ← I where I ⊆ V, E(I) = ∅

• Constraint Verification: The primary filter is strict K3-freeness. The secondary constraint, 

α(G) < 9, is verified by calculating the independence number (equivalent to the maximum clique in the complement graph ¯ G). • Local Refinement: A local search phase attempts to lower the independence number of the graph. It flips edges (u, v) to reduce α(G) but rejects any move that introduces a triangle. 

10 Algorithm 12: Search algorithm for R(4, 4 )

• Algebraic Initialization (Paley Graph): The search begins by explicitly constructing the Paley Graph of order 17 ( P17 ), a known valid graph for R(4, 4 ). Edges are defined based on quadratic residues modulo 17: 

(u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ (u − v) (mod 17 ) ∈ { 12, 2 2, . . . , 8 2}

• Stochastic Search for Higher Orders: From n = 18 onwards, the algorithm switches to a stochastic approach. It initializes a random graph G ∼ G(n, 0.5 ) and attempts to refine it into a valid (4, 4 )-free graph using Simulated Annealing. • Symmetric Objective Function: The energy function treats cliques and independent sets sym-metrically (since r = s = 4). The goal is to minimize the total count of 4-cliques and 4-anticliques: 

E(G) = count (K4) + count (I4)

• Simulated Annealing Loop: The algorithm iteratively flips random edges (u, v). A move is accepted if it lowers the energy E(G) or probabilistically via the Metropolis criterion ( e−∆E/T ). If the temperature drops below a threshold Tmin , it resets to T = 1.0 (reheating) to escape local minima. 

Algorithm 13: Search algorithm for R(4, 5 )

• Sequential Growth with Multi-Start: The algorithm iterates through target sizes n, advancing only after a valid (4, 5 )-free graph is found. For each size, it launches up to 15 independent restarts to prevent stagnation in local minima. • Density-Cycling Initialization: To explore different structural regimes, each restart initializes the graph with a different edge probability, cycling through p ∈ { 0.35, 0.40, 0.45 }. This targets specific density windows where valid R(4, 5 ) graphs are statistically more likely to exist. • Standard Simulated Annealing: The refinement process minimizes the unweighted defect sum E(G) = count (K4) + count (I5). Transitions involve single edge flips, accepted via the Metropolis criterion with a slow geometric cooling schedule ( Tnew ≈ 0.99999 · Tcurr ). 

Algorithm 14: Search algorithm for R(3, 10 )

• Algebraic Bootstrap ( P29 ): The search is seeded with a high-quality algebraic construction: the Paley Graph of order 29. This provides a guaranteed symmetric, dense starting point close to the target constraints. 

V = Z29 , (u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ u − v ∈ (Z∗

> 29

)2

• Iterative Extension Protocol: The algorithm grows the graph incrementally ( n → n + 1). It only attempts to solve for size n + 1 after fully resolving the constraints for size n (reaching zero defects). • Multi-Start Greedy Initialization: When adding a new vertex vnew , the algorithm tests three initialization patterns for its incident edges—Empty, Complete, and Random. It applies a greedy local descent to vnew ’s connections to minimize immediate conflicts before starting the full global optimization. • Simulated Annealing Refinement: The graph undergoes global Simulated Annealing to min-imize the unweighted defect sum E(G) = count (K3) + count (I10 ). Transitions are standard edge flips with a geometric cooling schedule. 

11 Algorithm 15: Search algorithm for R(3, 11 )

• Hybrid Fractal Initialization: The search is seeded with a diverse pool of starting graphs, including algebraic Paley graphs ( P47 ), Cyclic graphs found via sum-free set search, and a unique Fractal Construction that recursively partitions vertices and assigns edge probabilities to create self-similar substructures. • Entropic Force Field (Adaptive Scoring): The optimization minimizes a dynamic energy func-tion. The weights WK3 and WI11 are not constant; they adjust in real-time based on the ratio of current violations, effectively directing “force” against the dominant defect type: 

E(G, t) = WK3 (t) · count (K3) + WI11 (t) · count (I11 )

• Targeted Edge Flipper (TEF): Instead of proposing purely random edge flips, the algorithm samples a batch of M potential edges. It calculates the weighted ∆E for all of them and selects the move with the most favorable gradient for the Metropolis acceptance step. • Clique Delta Matrix (CDM): To support the high throughput of TEF, the algorithm maintains a dynamic matrix tracking common neighbors, Dij = |N(i) ∩ N(j)|. This allows the calculation of ∆K3 for edge removals in O(1) time. • Adaptive Entropic Temperature (AETS): The cooling schedule is driven by a “frustration in-dex” (the gap between the current score and the best-known score). This allows the tem-perature to automatically rise (reheat) when the search stagnates and cool down when rapid progress is being made. 

Algorithm 16: Search algorithm for R(3, 16 )

• Diverse Algebraic Seeding: The search is seeded with candidates from three algebraic con-structions: 1. Standard Cyclic: Based on sum-free sets in Zn.2. Product Cyclic: Based on sum-free sets in Zp × Zq (where n = pq ). 3. Multiplicative Coset: Unions of cosets of multiplicative subgroups in Z∗

> n

.• Population-Based Extension: A population of valid graphs is maintained, sorted by size. To generate a candidate of size n + 1, the largest available valid graph is extended by connecting the new vertex to a large independent set of the existing graph (or a random subset thereof). • Objective Function: The minimization target penalizes triangles heavily and independent sets linearly: 

E(G) = count (K3) + max (0, α(G) − 15 )

• Tabu-Enhanced Local Search: The refinement phase uses Tabu Search to escape local optima. Move selection is strategic: 

– If K3 > 0: Prioritize breaking edges involved in triangles. 

– If K3 = 0 but α(G) ≥ 16: Prioritize adding edges between vertices in large independent sets. • Fast Heuristics: During the intensive local search, α(G) is approximated using a fast random-ized bitset heuristic to avoid the expensive exact calculation until the end of the iteration. 

12 Algorithm 17: Search algorithm for R(3, 17 )

• Heuristic Alpha Filtration: To avoid the computational cost of exact independence number calculations, the algorithm relies on randomized greedy heuristics (using both random and degree-based vertex orderings) to detect independent sets of size s = 17. Exact verification is reserved for final confirmation. • Circulant Bootstrap: The search prioritizes symmetric structures by attempting to construct valid Circulant Graphs generated by sum-free sets S ⊂ Zn. This ensures K3-freeness by de-sign, reducing the problem to checking α(G) < 17. • Smart Extension (Vertex Cloning): When extending a valid graph from n → n + 1, the new vertex is not initialized randomly. Instead, it clones the connectivity pattern of a random existing vertex, followed by a slight random perturbation. This preserves the valid structural properties of the parent graph. • Targeted Simulated Annealing: The refinement phase minimizes a weighted energy function 

E(G) = 100 · count (K3) + 10 · count (I17 ). Crucially, the move generator is biased : it selects edges incident to ”violating vertices” (those currently part of a clique or large independent set) with 70% probability, focusing optimization effort where it is most needed. 

Algorithm 18: Search algorithm for R(3, 19 )

• Circulant Bootstrap ( C56 ): The search is seeded with a known valid Circulant graph of order 56 ( C56 ), defined by a specific set of generators. This provides a massive head-start compared to random initialization. • Hybrid Search Strategy: The algorithm alternates between two phases: 1. Circulant Search: Exhaustively searches for larger valid Circulant graphs by testing ran-dom generator sets S ⊂ { 1, . . . , n/2 }.2. Graph Growth: Greedily extends the best known graph by adding vertices ( n → n + 1) with connectivity patterns that avoid triangles. • Independent Set Repair: If a candidate graph contains an independent set I of size 19, the algorithm attempts to ”repair” it by adding an edge between two vertices u, v ∈ I. This edge destroys the independent set but is only added if it does not create a triangle (i.e., u, v share no common neighbors). • Densification: To proactively prevent large independent sets, the algorithm periodically ”den-sifies” the graph by adding random safe edges (edges that do not complete a triangle) until no such edges can be added. 

13 Algorithm 19: Search algorithm for R(3, 20 )

• High-Quality Initialization ( P43 ): The search is jump-started with the Paley graph of order 43 (P43 ), a known (3, s)-free graph where s ≪ 20. This provides a large, dense, valid core structure immediately. • Biased Generator Search: The algorithm searches for valid Circulant extensions by generat-ing random generator sets S. Crucially, the search is **biased**: new generator sets are often derived from the set Sbest of the best-known graph, perturbing it slightly rather than starting from scratch. • Greedy Alpha Estimation: To filter graphs efficiently, the independence number is estimated using a randomized greedy heuristic. Exact calculation of α(G) is only performed if the greedy estimate is dangerously close to the limit (18 ≤ αest < 20) or if the graph size is small ( n ≤ 65). • Mutation-Based Growth: Upon finding a new best graph Gbest , the algorithm attempts to grow it to size n + 1 via mutation. It creates a candidate by cloning Gbest and adding an iso-lated vertex, then performs a focused local search (random edge flips and triangle breaking) to resolve new violations. 

Algorithm 20: Search algorithm for R(3, 21 )

• Randomized Local Search (RLS) for α(G): Instead of exact independence number calculation, the algorithm uses a randomized heuristic. It constructs an initial independent set greedily and then performs local vertex swaps (add one vertex, remove its neighbors) to try and increase the set size to 21. If it fails to find an IS of size 21 after many iterations, the graph is potentially valid. • Cyclic Graph Construction: The core search strategy focuses on finding large valid Cyclic Graphs . Edges are defined by a generator set S ⊂ { 1, . . . , n/2 }. To ensure K3-freeness, the set 

S must be sum-free modulo n (i.e., no x, y, z ∈ S such that x + y = z, x + y + z = 0, etc.). • Iterative Generator Augmentation: The sum-free generator set S is built iteratively. The algo-rithm makes multiple passes over a shuffled pool of candidates {1, . . . , n/2 }. In each pass, it adds any candidate x that does not conflict with the existing members of S (maintaining the sum-free property). • Optimized Delta Updates: For local search and graph refinement, the change in the number of triangles ( ∆K3) upon flipping an edge (u, v) is calculated efficiently using vector operations on the adjacency matrix ( A) rows: 

∆K3(u, v) = ±| N(u) ∩ N(v)| = ± ⟨ Au, Av⟩

14 Algorithm 21: Search algorithm for R(3, 22 )

• Cyclic Bootstrap ( C101 ): The search bypasses lower-order graphs by initializing with a known valid Circulant graph of order 101 ( C101 ) defined by a specific set of generators. This focuses the computational budget on the frontier of the problem space. • Sum-Free Generator Construction: The algorithm constructs candidate graphs exclusively within the family of Circulant Graphs . It builds generator sets S by randomly selecting el-ements g ∈ { 1, . . . , n/2 } and verifying strict sum-free conditions (e.g., 3 g̸ = 0, 2 g /∈ − S,

g /∈ − (S + S)). This guarantees K3-freeness algebraically. • Randomized Greedy Filtration: To evaluate the independence number α(G), the algorithm employs a fast randomized greedy heuristic. It runs up to 2,000 trials of generating maximal independent sets via random vertex orderings to estimate the lower bound of α(G).• Conditional Exact Verification: Exact calculation of the independence number is computa-tionally expensive and is restricted to: 1. Smaller graphs where verification is fast ( n ≤ 95). 2. Promising candidates where the greedy approximation suggests validity ( αapprox < 22). 

Algorithm 22: Search algorithm for R(4, 6 )

• Cyclic Initialization: The search prioritizes structural regularity by initializing with the best 

Cyclic Graph found within a short time budget. It generates random sets of ”chords” (dis-tances) D ⊂ { 1, . . . , n/2 } and selects the graph that minimizes the initial defect count. • Tabu Search Refinement: The core optimization engine is a Tabu Search that iteratively flips edges to minimize the unweighted sum of violations: 

E(G) = count (K4) + count (I6)

Recent moves are stored in a Tabu list (tenure ≈ N) to prevent cycling and encourage explo-ration. • High-Performance Delta Updates: To support high-throughput sampling, the cost change (∆E) for flipping an edge (u, v) is calculated efficiently using subgraph induction on common neighbors: 

– ∆K4: Depends on edges in the subgraph induced by N(u) ∩ N(v).

– ∆I6: Depends on non-edges in the common non-neighborhood of u, v.• Stagnation Handling (Perturbation): If the search stagnates (no improvement for a dynamic number of iterations based on N2), the algorithm triggers a restart mechanism: 

– High Cost: Restart with a fresh Cyclic graph. 

– Low Cost: Apply a medium perturbation (flip 25% of edges). • Incremental Growth: The search proceeds sequentially ( n → n + 1). When extending a valid graph to the next size, the new vertex is connected with a target density of ≈ 0.4, providing a ”warm start” for the Tabu search at the new size. 

15 Algorithm 23: Search algorithm for R(4, 7 )

• Genetic Circulant Search (Phase 1): The search first explores the structured space of Circulant Graphs . It evolves a population of generator vectors (jump offsets) using a Genetic Algorithm: 

– Seeding: Initialized with known good generators for n ∈ { 35, 36 } and random density vectors ( p ≈ 0.3 − 0.5). 

– Operators: Uses tournament selection, single-point crossover, and bit-flip mutation. 

– Elitism: Preserves the fittest candidate across generations. • Targeted Tabu Search (Phase 2): The best candidate from the GA (or an extension of the pre-vious best graph) is refined using Tabu Search. The neighborhood generation is focused :

N (G) = {(u, v) | u, v ∈ clique (K4) ∨ u, v ∈ indep set (I7)} ∪ Random This prioritizes breaking existing violations while maintaining exploration. • Perturbation Restart: If the Tabu Search stagnates (no improvement for 100 iterations), the algorithm triggers a ”kick” by randomly flipping 10% of the edges in the current best solution to escape the local minimum. • Sequential Extension: If a valid graph for size n is found, the search advances to n + 1. If scratch construction fails, it attempts to extend Gn by adding a new vertex with random con-nections ( ρ ≈ 0.38) before optimizing. • Objective Function: Both phases minimize the unweighted sum of constraints: 

E(G) = count (K4) + count (I7)

Algorithm 24: Search algorithm for R(4, 10 )

• Circulant Search with Adaptive Probabilities: The primary search mechanism explores Cir-culant Graphs . The probability of including each generator g ∈ { 1, . . . , n/2 } is not static; it is learned adaptively. Successful configurations increase the probability of their active generators (reinforcement learning), biasing future searches toward productive subspaces. • Near-Miss Repository: The algorithm maintains a repository of ”near-miss” graphs (graphs with few violations) for each size n. If a perfect graph cannot be found from scratch, the search retrieves a near-miss from the repository (or the best graph from size n − 1) and attempts to repair it. • Hybrid Tabu Repair: The repair process uses a Tabu Search on a hybrid graph representation (Adjacency Matrix + Adjacency List) to enable fast delta updates. 

– Move Selection: Candidates are chosen by prioritizing edges involved in existing K4 or I10 

violations, mixed with random edges for exploration. 

– Delta Calculation: ∆K4 is computed via intersection of adjacency sets; ∆I10 is computed by finding 8-cliques in the common non-neighborhood of the complement graph. • Heuristic Filtration: To speed up evaluation, I10 checks are performed using a randomized heuristic that estimates the maximum independent set size. Exact verification is only triggered when the heuristic indicates a potential valid solution (cost=0). • Sequential Growth: The search advances sequentially. A valid graph Gn is used as a seed for finding Gn+1, ensuring that the search for larger graphs starts from a high-quality, nearly-valid structure. 

16 Algorithm 25: Search algorithm for R(4, 12 )

• Algebraic Bootstrap ( P∗

> 127

): The algorithm initializes with a high-quality algebraic graph of order 127 based on cubic residues in F127 . Specifically, V = F127 and (u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ (v − u) ∈{x3 | x ∈ F∗

> 127

}. This graph is known to be (4, 12 )-free. • Extension Search (Phase 1): To reach n = 128, the algorithm searches for a valid ”extension mask” (neighborhood vector for the new vertex v128 ). This is formulated as minimizing a cost function: 

E(m) = count (K3 ∈ N(v128 )) + count (I11 ∈ V \ N(v128 )) 

A short Simulated Annealing phase optimizes this mask to find a low-defect starting configu-ration. • Targeted Defect Repair (Phase 2): The 128-vertex graph is refined using a specialized Simu-lated Annealing process. 

– Defect Tracking: The algorithm periodically enumerates all K4 and I12 subgraphs and maps them to their constituent edges. 

– Biased Sampling: Edge flip candidates are not chosen uniformly; edges participating in more defects are weighted higher for selection. 

– Fast Delta Update: The cost change ∆E is computed efficiently by inspecting only the local neighborhood of the flipped edge (checking for K2 in common neighbors or I10 in common non-neighbors). 

Algorithm 26: Search algorithm for R(5, 7 )

• Vertex-Transitive Search Space: The algorithm restricts the search to Cayley Graphs based on cyclic groups. Because these graphs are vertex-transitive, the structural properties of every vertex are identical. This allows the cost function to be evaluated by inspecting only the local neighborhood of a single vertex (vertex 0), massively reducing computational overhead. • Localized Cost Function: Instead of counting all cliques in the graph, the algorithm minimizes a localized proxy score: 

– K5: Approximated by finding K4 in the neighborhood of vertex 0. 

– I7: Approximated by finding I6 in the non-neighborhood of vertex 0. 

E(S) ≈ n

5 · count (K4 ∈ N(0)) + n

7 · count (I6 ∈ V \ N(0)) 

• Stochastic Generator Optimization: The generator set S ⊂ { 1, . . . , n/2 } is optimized using Simulated Annealing. Moves consist of adding or removing a generator from S.• Adaptive Local Refinement: If a graph with low (but non-zero) defects is found, it under-goes a refinement phase using adaptive edge weighting . Edges that frequently participate in beneficial flips are assigned higher weights (interest), guiding the local search toward critical structures. 

17 Algorithm 27: Search algorithm for R(5, 8 )

• Vertex-Transitive Reduction: The search relies heavily on Circulant Graphs . Exploiting vertex transitivity, the global clique count is reduced to local subgraph counting around vertex 0: 

– K5 count → n 

> 5

× count (K4 in N(0)) 

– I8 count → n 

> 8

× count (K7 in V \ N(0)) 

• Fractal Mirror Initialization: When extending a valid graph from n → n + 1, the algorithm uses a ”Fractal Self-Similarity” heuristic. Instead of random initialization, the new vertex vnew 

mirrors the connectivity of a randomly selected existing vertex vmirror , with a 15% noise factor. This preserves the local Ramsey-safe substructures of the parent graph. • Parallelized Simulated Annealing: The solution space is explored concurrently using a mul-tiprocessing pool. Each worker runs an independent Simulated Annealing chain, swapping generator offsets to minimize defects. • Delta-Update Local Search: For general (non-circulant) refinement, edge flips are evaluated using efficient local counting: 

– ∆K5: Calculated by finding K3 in the common neighborhood. 

– ∆I8: Calculated by finding I6 in the common non-neighborhood. • Sequential Hybrid Strategy: The workflow alternates: find a valid base using the fast Circu-lant search, then push the size limit using the general Local Search with the fractal extension strategy. 

Algorithm 28: Search algorithm for R(5, 9 )

• Circulant Subspace Search: The algorithm exclusively searches the space of Circulant Graphs . The search space is defined by the binary vector of generators {g1, . . . , g⌊n/2 ⌋}. This algebraic structure is chosen because known Ramsey graphs frequently exhibit high symmetry. • Localized Scoring: The objective function exploits vertex transitivity to reduce the cost of calculating global defects. Instead of full enumeration, it checks only the neighborhood of vertex 0: 

– K5: Approximated by finding K4 in the neighborhood N(0).

– I9: Approximated by finding I8 (i.e., K8 in complement) in the non-neighborhood N(0).• Iterated Local Search (ILS): The generator vector is optimized using a two-tier strategy: 1. Tabu Search (Inner Loop): Greedily flips generators to minimize the local score, using a Tabu list to prevent cycling. Aspiration criteria allow tabu moves if they yield a new global best. 2. Perturbation (Outer Loop): When Tabu Search settles, the solution is ”kicked” by ran-domly flipping a small fraction (2-10 • Aggressive Growth Strategy: The search iterates graph sizes n. Upon finding a valid graph at size n, it attempts an aggressive ”jump” (e.g., n → n + 8) to rapidly probe upper bounds. If the jump fails, it falls back to incremental growth ( n → n + 1) to fill the gap. 

18 Algorithm 29: Search algorithm for R(6, 7 )

• Quadratic Residue Initialization ( Pp): The search is seeded with a Paley Graph constructed from quadratic residues modulo a prime p. This algebraic structure ensures high symmetry and avoids small cliques by definition ( Kk-free for k ≈ ln p). 

(u, v) ∈ E ⇐⇒ (v − u) (mod p) ∈ { x2 | x ∈ F∗

> p

}

• Asynchronous Tabu Search: The graph is refined using Tabu Search. To handle the high com-putational cost of counting K6 and I7, the algorithm employs Asynchronous Re-evaluation :full violation lists are recomputed only periodically ( T ≈ n/3), while inner loops rely on cached (potentially stale) data to maximize iteration speed. • Genetic Column Generation: 

When extending the graph ( n → n + 1), the connectivity of the new vertex is optimized us-ing a Genetic Algorithm . The population consists of binary ”connection vectors” evolved via crossover and mutation, initialized based on the connectivity patterns of existing vertices (mimicry) rather than pure randomness. • Chaotic Descent Restart: If the local search stagnates, a ”Chaotic Descent” mechanism is trig-gered. It perturbs the graph using a deterministic but distinct quadratic residue mapping based on a different prime q, effectively scrambling the adjacency matrix while retaining some quasi-random algebraic properties. • Violation-Frequency Sampling: Edge flip candidates are selected based on a frequency map: edges that appear most frequently in the set of all current K6 and I7 subgraphs are prioritized for flipping. 

19